Requests by my USDA scientists, ordered by priority:

1. TNM development:  We are also in the process of studying alternative methods of neutron/gamma analysis with a different type of neutron generator called a Tagged Neutron Method (TNM) (also known as associated particle imaging (API) method).  Using this neutron generator system, it is possible to more precisely measure segments of soil which can allow additional analysis techniques to be used.  This project we would like to consider is different mathematical methods for the following:  
    -	Investigating different spectra deconvolution methods. Choosing optimal procedure for soil content determination from TNM gamma spectra.
    -	Developing errors calculation methodology of soil component content determination at deconvolution procedure from TNM gamma spectra.	

2. Estimation C content in 30 cm soil layer: The MINS system for measuring soil C is based on equations developed from Monte Carlo MCNP analysis of soil using the basic MINS design and 0-30 cm area cone shaped Area of Influence that is being measured by the gamma detectors.  It was determined that the developed equations would provide accurately measure of the C content in the 0-10 cm depth increments regardless of how the C was distributed in the 0-30 cm increment.  However, the results for measuring the 0-30 increment were dependent on the soil /C distribution by depth.  To address this issue, a correction factor was developed that allowed the MINS system to estimate the C content for 0-30 cm based on a general ratio of C in 0-10 cm to 0-30 cm depth.  A correction factor of 0.55 has been shown to work well in the soils in Alabama even if the actual 0-10/0-30 ratio varied somewhat in the measured soil. For example, the MINS measurements of a row crop field and a pasture with a somewhat different ratios resulted in soil C measurement with the MINS that was the same compared to the soil core sampling with DC analysis.  All our accuracy analysis used this correction factor for MINS analysis.  However, the question is how far this ratio could vary before the accuracy of the MINS measurements would no longer have satisfactory accurate (the accuracy of soil core sampling could be used as a benchmark).  Galina has done a literature search and found that the ratio does change depending on the soil type such as Entisols, Mollisols, Ultisols, and Vertisols (major cropping soil types).  The current plan is to potential change the correction factor when sampling these major soil types, but we need to understand how much impact it would have on results.  The following is methods we think could be used to generate data, but we need help with the best methods to statistically compare results for this purpose.      
-	conduct MCNP for reference pits to build the calibration line.
-	conduct MCNP for different C content distribution and different soil types and density (Entisols, Mollisols, Ultisols, and Vertisols), calculate C content using calibration line, compare it with modeled values.
-	find the dependency of the C10/C30 correction factor with soil types and C distribution; estimate error of using 0.55 factor for all cases.
-	estimate error of MINS measurements/recalculation of the C in 30 cm depends on the applied correction factor (0.55 +/-…) and compare it with DC results for conducted experiments where cores were taken simultaneously with MINS measurements.
-	conduct comparison analysis of MINS results (for 30 cm) applied different C10/C30 correction factor, and DC analysis with different cores number; estimate range of the factor at which error of MINS measurements <= DC analysis measurements with core #.

3. Comparison MINS and soil core measurements: Soil core sampling with dry combustion (DC) laboratory analysis is considered the “gold standard” for measuring soil C levels across a field.  However, we believe that the MINS measurements are much more accurate and have made some efforts to show this statistically.  The focus of this project is to determine if there is a better way to statistically prove this.  We have collected some extensive soil sampling field data along with MINS scans for comparison.  We have made a start on this effort by demonstrating how variable core samples can be by comparing the variability of soil cores within a small area.  But we would like to expand this to a comparison of the MINS results.         
-	Create a procedure for comparison of the C content determination by MINS and DC analysis for a whole field using data we have already collected.  
-	Make analysis for existing field measurements for C at 0-10 cm layer.
-	Consider Modeling various C distribution over the field of point sampling and with same average for whole field and see how it could have potential impacts.  The goal would be to define the conditions when MINS measurements have advantages over core point sampling measurements.

4. Mapping:  The soil scanning system we have developed provides soil C distribution maps once a field has been scanned.  Our system can gather a lot of information from a given area in a field and quickly determine the average soil C content of that area and provide a georeferenced data point for the center of where the data was collected.  The maps themselves are generated by taking these georeferenced data points and running a standard mapping software system (ArcGIS) that takes georeferenced data points and produces a map.  These mapping software systems allows for different mathematical data processing methods to be generate the maps.  We would like to know for our system which mathematical mapping technique would produce the best representative map.  
-	investigate different methods of interpolation of the acquired data (C content) with estimation of the errors of building isolines.
-	estimate dependency of the constructed map with number of measured points.  The segment size can be adjusted, so how small should the segment sections be to give best results.  
-	estimate dependency of the constructed map with measurement error.
-	Are the maps affected by element being mapped – C vs. H (small peak area for C vs large peak area for H, for example).  
-	estimate the errors of building isolines with various C content distribution over the field.  Do we need to have more points if the C variability is increased?

Once the best technique for generating the map is established, can a friendly user interface for the process be developed.  

5. Determination of the impact of the surface area sampled on MINS measurement: The MINS cart in scanning mode will produce a continuous ribbon of soil sampled as it moves across the field.  The current methods to scan a field does not cover 100% of a field’s soil surface, but instead uses a system (called Path Finder) that presets a path for the MINS to follow and which can be returned to later to precisely follow the same path.  The paths are set to systematically go across a field with preset distances between the passes.  The current protocol sets these passes such that approximately 3% of the field’s surface area is covered.
    Another factor that is part of the field sampling protocol is the frequency of recording MINS measurements (30 s for now).  With gamma analysis for soil C, a 15-minute time increment of the collected gamma spectra is required to get adequate data for C content (it is much shorter for H), but the time does not need to be continuous.  It can be put together from segments that add up to 15-minutes.  The current protocol measures gamma spectra and records it in 30 second segments that are georeferenced.  We pull these 30-sec segments together to get a 15-minute segment that is analyzed for C and then given a georeferenced in the center of the collected segments.  
     All our accuracy studies have been developed using this protocol with very good results compared to soil core sampling.  However, we set these factors based on our best guess and have never tested the impact of shifting these factors on results.  We would like to study the impact of changing these factors and believe that the MINS data we have already collected can be used for this purpose.  However, we would like to establish a statistical method which would help us determine the best time segment and surface coverage area that would be best and or most efficient.  For example, could we get good results from 1½% surface area coverage instead of 3% which would cut the time of sampling in half. (from experiments)
    Using MCNP and some mathematical approach consider coverage area changing from 100% -->> zero, for different C distribution over the field.
     Consider application machine learning: where C signal higher – scanning time less, where C signal less – scanning time more. Where changing C signal less – scanning time less, and vice versa.